## What the Twitter plugin collects

The Twitter plugin collects your tweets, your friends' tweets, mentions of your @username, retweets of any of your tweets, your favorite tweets, the tweets you've replied to, your follower count (every crawl), the users you follow, the users who follow you, all links in all the tweets captured, image thumbnails from links in all the captured tweets, individual places (lat/long, place name), places as they are related to individual tweets and users, hashtags (realtime only), what tweets of yours anyone has favorited (realtime only), and relationships between users (whether or not they've friended/followed each other).

Source: https://github.com/ginatrapani/ThinkUp/wiki/Configuration:-Twitter via [Anyone else surprised by the size of their database?](http://groups.google.com/group/thinkupapp/msg/e1c3ef952c846442?hl=en)

## Setup

http://git.greptilian.com/?p=salt.git;a=blob;f=server1/etc/httpd/conf.d/thinkup.greptilian.com.conf;hb=6518c843f063d5b0fe4b50e66f06d412b28a443e

http://git.greptilian.com/?p=salt.git;a=blob;f=server1/server1.sls;hb=8309e7778cf4fc2f8756f7f05bab47fc73cb72f0#l68

### Database setup

    [root@server1 ~]# mysql -u root -p
    Enter password: 
    Welcome to the MySQL monitor.  Commands end with ; or \g.
    Your MySQL connection id is 2
    Server version: 5.1.61 Source distribution

    Copyright (c) 2000, 2011, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.

    Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle Corporation and/or its
    affiliates. Other names may be trademarks of their respective
    owners.

    Type 'help;' or '\h' for help. Type '\c' to clear the current input statement.

    mysql> create database thinkup;
    Query OK, 1 row affected (0.00 sec)

    mysql> grant all privileges on thinkup.* to 'thinkup'@'localhost' identified by 'REDACTED';
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

    mysql> flush privileges;
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

    mysql> 
