* http://supybot.com
* http://supybot.git.sourceforge.net/git/gitweb.cgi?p=supybot/supybot;a=tree;f=doc (official docs, I think)
* http://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/gribble/index.php?title=Supybot_Resources
* http://supybook.fealdia.org
* http://supybot.fr.cr/doc/
* http://supybot.fr.cr/doc/use/plugins/google.html#google-lucky-snippet-search
* http://github.com/code4lib/supybot-plugins
* http://github.com/ProgVal/Limnoria "A modified version of Supybot with internationalization, embedded web server, bug fixes, and several other enhancements"

## crimsonfubot setup

    [root@server1 ~]# cat /etc/centos-release 
    CentOS release 6.2 (Final)
    [root@server1 ~]# 
    [root@server1 ~]# rpm -qi supybot
    Name        : supybot                      Relocations: (not relocatable)
    Version     : 0.83.4.1                          Vendor: Fedora Project
    Release     : 3.el6                         Build Date: Mon 18 Apr 2011 04:12:52 PM EDT
    Install Date: Fri 08 Jun 2012 09:54:53 PM EDT      Build Host: x86-17.phx2.fedoraproject.org
    Group       : Applications/Internet         Source RPM: supybot-0.83.4.1-3.el6.src.rpm
    Size        : 4081850                          License: BSD and GPLv2
    Signature   : RSA/8, Tue 19 Apr 2011 04:55:08 AM EDT, Key ID 3b49df2a0608b895
    Packager    : Fedora Project
    URL         : http://supybot.com
    Summary     : Cross-platform IRC bot written in Python
    Description :
    Supybot is a robust, user-friendly, and programmer-friendly Python IRC bot.
    It aims to be an adequate replacement for most existing IRC bots.  It
    includes a very flexible and powerful ACL system for controlling access
    to commands, as well as more than 50 builtin plugins providing around
    400 actual commands.
    [root@server1 ~]# 
    [root@server1 ~]# su - supybot
    [supybot@server1 ~]$ supybot-wizard 
    /usr/bin/supybot-wizard:48: DeprecationWarning: the sets module is deprecated
      import sets
    ERROR 2012-06-08T21:55:55 Invalid user dictionary file, resetting to empty.
    ERROR 2012-06-08T21:55:55 Exact error: IOError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'conf/users.conf'
    ERROR 2012-06-08T21:55:55 Invalid channel database, resetting to empty.
    ERROR 2012-06-08T21:55:55 Exact error: IOError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'conf/channels.conf'
    WARNING 2012-06-08T21:55:55 Couldn't open ignore database: [Errno 2] No such
            file or directory: 'conf/ignores.conf'
    This is a wizard to help you start running supybot. What it will
    do is create the necessary config files based on the options you
    select here. So hold on tight and be ready to be interrogated :)

    First of all, we can bold the questions you're asked so you can
    easily distinguish the mostly useless blather (like this) from
    the questions that you actually have to answer.

    Would you like to try this bolding? [y/n] (default: y) 

     Do you see this in bold? [y/n] 

    Sorry, that response was not an option.

     Do you see this in bold? [y/n] y

    Great!

    We've got some preliminary things to get out of the way before we
    can really start asking you questions that directly relate to
    what your bot is going to be like.

    We want to know if you consider yourself an advanced Supybot user
    because some questions are just utterly boring and useless for
    new users. Others might not make sense unless you've used Supybot
    for some time.

     Are you an advanced Supybot user? [y/n] (default: n) 

    Your bot needs to create some directories in order to store the
    various log, config, and data files.

     Where would you like to create these directories? (default: .) 

    Good! We're done with the directory stuff.

    Now we're going to ask you things that actually relate to the bot
    you'll be running.

    First, we need to know the name of the network you'd like to
    connect to. Not the server host, mind you, but the name of the
    network. If you plan to connect to irc.freenode.net, for
    instance, you should answer this question with 'freenode'
    (without the quotes).

     What IRC network will you be connecting to? freenode

     What server would you like to connect to? irc.freenode.net

    Found irc.freenode.net (no network available).

    IRC Servers almost always accept connections on port 6667. They
    can, however, accept connections anywhere their admin feels like
    he wants to accept connections from.

     Does this server require connection on a non-standard port? [y/
    n] (default: n) 

     What nick would you like your bot to use? crimsonfubot

    Some servers require a password to connect to them. Most public
    servers don't. If you try to connect to a server and for some
    reason it just won't work, it might be that you need to set a
    password.

     Do you want to set such a password? [y/n] (default: n) 

    Of course, having an IRC bot isn't the most useful thing in the
    world unless you can make that bot join some channels.

     Do you want your bot to join some channels when he connects? [y/
    n] (default: y) 

    Separate channels with spaces. If the channel is locked with a
    key, follow the channel name with the key separated by a comma.
    For example: #supybot-bots #mychannel,mykey #otherchannel

     What channels? (default: ) #crimsonfu

    Beginning configuration for Admin...


    Done!

    Beginning configuration for User...


    Done!

    Beginning configuration for Channel...


    Done!

    Beginning configuration for Misc...


    Done!

    Beginning configuration for Config...


    Done!

    Now we're going to run you through plugin configuration. There's
    a variety of plugins in supybot by default, but you can create
    and add your own, of course. We'll allow you to take a look at
    the known plugins' descriptions and configure them if you like
    what you see.

     Would you like to look at plugins individually? [y/n] y

    Next comes your opportunity to learn more about the plugins that
    are available and select some (or all!) of them to run in your
    bot. Before you have to make a decision, of course, you'll be
    able to see a short description of the plugin and, if you choose,
    an example session with the plugin. Let's begin.

     What plugin would you like to look at? [Alias/Anonymous/
    AutoMode/BadWords/ChannelLogger/ChannelStats/Ctcp/Dict/Dunno/
    Factoids/Filter/Format/Games/Google/Herald/Internet/Karma/
    Lart/Later/Limiter/Math/MoobotFactoids/Network/News/
    NickCapture/Nickometer/Note/Plugin/Praise/Protector/Quote/
    QuoteGrabs/RSS/Relay/Reply/Scheduler/Seen/Services/ShrinkUrl/
    Status/String/Success/Time/Todo/Topic/URL/Unix/Utilities/
    Web] Google


    Accesses Google for various things.


     Would you like to load this plugin? [y/n] (default: y) 

    Beginning configuration for Google...

    The Google plugin has the functionality to watch for URLs that
    match a specific pattern. (We call this a snarfer) When supybot
    sees such a URL, it will parse the web page for information and
    reply with the results. Google has two available snarfers: Google
    Groups link snarfing and a google search snarfer.

     Do you want the Google Groups link snarfer enabled by default?
    [y/n] n

     Do you want the Google search snarfer enabled by default? [y/
    n] y


    Done!

     Would you like add another plugin? [y/n] n

    Although supybot offers a supybot-adduser script, with which you
    can add users to your bot's user database, it's *very* important
    that you have an owner user for you bot.

     Would you like to add an owner user for your bot? [y/n]
    (default: y) 

     What should the owner's username be? pdurbin

    What should the owner's password be? 
    Re-enter password: 
    Of course, when you're in an IRC channel you can address the bot
    by its nick and it will respond, if you give it a valid command
    (it may or may not respond, depending on what your config
    variable replyWhenNotCommand is set to). But your bot can also
    respond to a short "prefix character," so instead of saying "bot:
    do this," you can say, "@do this" and achieve the same effect. Of
    course, you don't *have* to have a prefix char, but if the bot
    ends up participating significantly in your channel, it'll ease
    things.

     Would you like to set the prefix char(s) for your bot? [y/n]
    (default: y) 

    Enter any characters you want here, but be careful: they should
    be rare enough that people don't accidentally address the bot
    (simply because they'll probably be annoyed if they do address
    the bot on accident). You can even have more than one. I
    (jemfinch) am quite partial to @, but that's because I've been
    using it since my ocamlbot days.

     What would you like your bot's prefix character(s) to be? @

    There are a lot of options we didn't ask you about simply because
    we'd rather you get up and running and have time left to play
    around with your bot. But come back and see us! When you've
    played around with your bot enough to know what you like, what
    you don't like, what you'd like to change, then take a look at
    your configuration file when your bot isn't running and read the
    comments, tweaking values to your heart's desire.

    All done! Your new bot configuration is crimsonfubot.conf. If
    you're running a *nix based OS, you can probably start your bot
    with the command line "supybot crimsonfubot.conf". If you're not
    running a *nix or similar machine, you'll just have to start it
    like you start all your other Python scripts.

    [supybot@server1 ~]$ 
