Inkscape will be officially supported on Mac with the release of version 1.0, which is currently under development.

Alpha releases of Inkscape 1.0 are available that more or less "just work" on Mac. Bugs should be expected because alpha releases are even less stable than beta releases.

## Installing Inkscape 1.0alpha2 on Mac

Inkscape 1.0alpha2 is the first release to offer a download for Mac.

### Downloading Inkscape.app.tar.gz

Update: According to the [discussion][] in the "team_devel_mac" channel on 2019-08-17, a dmg file may be available soon.

[discussion]: https://chat.inkscape.org/channel/team_devel_mac?msg=ZnBKxDk98Fnizrfq5

https://inkscape.org/release/inkscape-1.0alpha2/ is the place to start. Click "Mac OS" and the file "Inkscape.app.tar.gz" should be automatically saved to your "Downloads" folder.

### Expanding Inkscape.app.tar.gz

"tar.gz" indicates that you have downloaded a "tarball", which is very similar to a zip file. You will need to "expand" this tarball before you have an "Inkscape" file that you can drag into your "Applications" folder.

Unfortunately, if you simply double-click "Inkscape.app.tar.gz" in your "Downloads" folder, you will get the following error:

> Unable to expand "Inkscape.app.tar.gz" into "Downloads".  
> (Error 1 - Operation not permitted)

A workaround for expanding the tarball is to open the "Terminal" application and type the following commands:

    cd Downloads
    tar xfz Inkscape.app.tar.gz

You will see some errors about "Python.framework" that you can safely ignore. (See below under "known issues" for more details on these errors.)

You should now have a file called "Inkscape" that looks like the Inkscape logo in your "Downloads" folder.

### Putting Inkscape in your Applications Folder

Drag "Inkscape" from "Downloads" to "Applications".

### Launching Inkscape for the first time

Depending on your security settings, you may see an error like the following when you double-click "Inkscape" to launch it:

> "Inkscape" can't be opened because it is from an unidentified developer.  
> Your security preferences allow installation of only apps from the App Store and identified developers.

The workaround is go to open "System Preferences" and then click "Security & Privacy" and then click "Open Anyway" next to the message that says the following:

> "Inkscape" was blocked from opening because it is not from an identified developer.

Once you have clicked "Open Anyway" you should see a dialog that say the following:

> "Inkscape is from an unidentified developer. Are you sure you want to open it?  
> Opening "Inkscape" will always allow it to run on this Mac.

Click "Open" and Inkscape should open.

## Known issues with Inkscape 1.0alpha2 on Mac

### Python.framework errors when expanding tarball

When you use the `tar xfz Inkscape.app.tar.gz` workaround above, the following errors will be shown:

    Inkscape.app/Contents/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/Current/Headers: Can't remove already-existing dir
    Inkscape.app/Contents/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.6/Headers: Can't remove already-existing dir
    Inkscape.app/Contents/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/Current: Can't remove already-existing dir
    Inkscape.app/Contents/Frameworks/Python.framework/Headers: Can't remove already-existing dir
    Inkscape.app/Contents/Frameworks/Python.framework/Resources: Can't remove already-existing dir
    tar: Error exit delayed from previous errors.

It is unknown if these errors relate to any bugs in Inkscape 1.0alpha2.
